# Athlete_Rating

## Abstract details

### Young Investigator Award Competition:

1. Freestyle snowboarding has 5 major disciplines and Moguls is one of them. Here all skiers have had to negotiate bumps, or moguls, at some point at lightning speeds and scored by a panel of judges. There are 3 levels of competitions depending on the nationality of athletes: First(World Championships / Olympics), Second(North American Tournaments), Third(Canadian Tournaments). There are multiple competitions on each level in a particular season/year. In Moguls, the current scoring method assigns fixed weightage for each level of the competition - First(1000), Second(800) and Third(500) and combines it with rank and final score to get the seasonal athlete rating. This method assumes all the top rankers for each competition has the same skill level. It does not consider the relative importance of competitiveness of different competitions at the same level. For e.g. 1st ranker in competition A with 85 points gets the higher rating than 2nd ranker in competition B with 90 points where both competitions are at the same level. This study aims to solve this by considering ranks and scores for all players in all the competitions in each level and develop an adjusted score based on their original score achieved in the competitions. We use the Moguls data from 2002 to 2019 for all 3 levels of competitions. We filter out top 30 ranks for men and top 20 ranks for women in each competition. Then we take into account all the competitions on each level and create normal distributions of scores on each rank. From these distributions, we compute the z-scores corresponding to each original score for each player. This allows us to compare different players having the same rank based on where they lie in the distribution. Then we adjust their original scores according to their relative positions(z-scores) on the distribution. For e.g. a 1st ranking player with the highest score among all the top rankers in all competitions gets the highest adjusted score for that level. The next part of our study was to enable comparisons across different levels. For this, we considered only the players who played on multiple levels in the same season. Modelling their scores with a mixed linear model approach, provided the difference between intercept of the scores of 2 levels. This difference was used to adjust the scores across different levels of competitions. This allows us to compare the performance of the same player across different competitions and different levels irrespective of their ranks. Therefore it is now possible to compare scores for a World Championship with a North American cup and vice versa directly from these adjusted scores and create a final rating of all athletes based on this. Although this method is developed for Moguls it can be used for any other discipline like halfpipe, big air, slopestyle or aerials.

